# Haskell Topics: Runtime: Links

Computing the size of a HashMap
http://blog.johantibell.com/2011/06/computing-size-of-hashmap.html

Ever wondered how big a closure is - by Simon Marlow, 2009
https://ghcmutterings.wordpress.com/2009/02/12/53/

The ghc-datasize User Guide, 2013
http://felsin9.de/nnis/ghc-datasize/

The ghc-vis User Guide
http://felsin9.de/nnis/ghc-vis/



(book) Haskell High Performance Programming - Samuli Thomasson, 2016
file:///T:/storage/books/.packt/books/9781786464217/index.html

GHC Commentary: The Haskell Execution Model - The Layout of Heap Objects
https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/commentary/rts/storage/heap-objects

Performance introduction
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Performance_introduction

Haskell 2010 Report
https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellli1.html#x2-1000

The New GHC/Hugs Runtime System
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/1998/01/new-rts.pdf

A Concurrent Garbage Collector for the GHC
https://well-typed.com/blog/aux/files/nonmoving-gc/design.pdf

GHC block allocator
https://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/cs257/archive/edward-yang/ghc-block-allocator.pdf


Lessons in Managing Haskell Memory, 2020
https://www.channable.com/tech/lessons-in-managing-haskell-memory

GHC (STG, Cmm, asm) illustrated
https://takenobu-hs.github.io/downloads/haskell_ghc_illustrated.pdf

GHC Runtime - Stack and Heap, 2017
http://www.mchaver.com/posts/2017-06-09-ghc-runtime-heap-and-stack.html

Adding Heap View to GHC
https://patrickdoc.github.io/heap-view.html


GHC.DataSize (package)
http://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-datasize-0.1.2/docs/GHC-DataSize.html

GHC-HeapView (package)
https://hackage.haskell.org/package/ghc-heap-view-0.6.2/docs/GHC-HeapView.html

GHC-Exts-Heap (package)
http://support.hfm.io/1.7/api/ghc-heap-8.6.4/GHC-Exts-Heap.html


New posts in GHC
https://newbedev.com/t/ghc


Memory footprint of Haskell data types
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3254758/memory-footprint-of-haskell-data-types?rq=1

How to find out GHC's memory representations of data types?
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6574444/how-to-find-out-ghcs-memory-representations-of-data-types

How can I determine size of a type in Haskell?
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9492801/how-can-i-determine-size-of-a-type-in-haskell?lq=1


As ghc implements haskell all objects on the heap
https://www.coursehero.com/file/p3t68qb1/As-GHC-implements-Haskell-all-objects-on-the-Heap-share-the-same-basic-layout/
