# Extension sets :: GHC2021

- https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/exts/control.html
- https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/9.2.1-alpha2/docs/html/users_guide/exts/control.html

## GHC Haskell

Haskell language has two official standards, Haskell 98 and Haskell 2010, but since nobody is working on the third, plus the fact that GHC is the canonical Haskell compiler, decorated with the fact that GHC is under the constant and franctic development that regularly result in new releases, it is time to forego the two official standards and state what everybody already knows - GHC flavored Haskell is de facto Haskell language standard and it now prescribes the Haskell language specification.

In fact, it pays to drop the phrase "GHC flavored Haskell" or "GHC Haskell" and just use Haskell for everything, since de jure and de facto the current offical language standard is dictated by the GHC compiler. This also means we should stop wiggling around weighting the pros and cons to enable some GHC extension - just do it. Perhaps not all but almost all.

That is what the `GHC2021` pragma is about - it enables a slew of extensions that are considered to be stable and fairly conservative, that were anyway already used across many top-tier projects.

## Details

* If neither Haskell98 nor Haskell2010 pragma is explicitly enabled, GHC defaults to GHC2021. However, to be future-safe, enable it explicitly.
* Because GHC2021 includes a number of non-standardized extensions, the stability guarantees are not as strong as those provided by Haskell2010.
* While GHC tries to avoid changing the semantics of extensions, such changes may and do happen. One of the recent examples is the *simplified subsumption* introduced in GHC 9.0, that caused GHC to reject some programs that were using the `RankNTypes` pragma.

## GHC2021

`GHC2021` pragma enables these 46 extensions:
- BangPatterns
- BinaryLiterals
- ConstrainedClassMethods
- ConstraintKinds
- DeriveDataTypeable
- DeriveFoldable
- DeriveFunctor
- DeriveGeneric
- DeriveLift
- DeriveTraversable
- DoAndIfThenElse
- EmptyCase
- EmptyDataDecls
- EmptyDataDeriving
- ExistentialQuantification
- ExplicitForAll
- FieldSelectors
- FlexibleContexts
- FlexibleInstances
- ForeignFunctionInterface
- GADTSyntax
- GeneralisedNewtypeDeriving
- HexFloatLiterals
- ImplicitPrelude
- ImportQualifiedPost
- InstanceSigs
- KindSignatures
- MonomorphismRestriction
- MultiParamTypeClasses
- NamedFieldPuns
- NamedWildCards
- NumericUnderscores
- PatternGuards
- PolyKinds
- PostfixOperators
- RankNTypes
- RelaxedPolyRec
- ScopedTypeVariables
- StandaloneDeriving
- StandaloneKindSignatures
- StarIsType
- TraditionalRecordSyntax
- TupleSections
- TypeApplications
- TypeOperators
- TypeSynonymInstances
